You know, when you look at a computer motherboard or like you open up a laptop,
everything makes this very rigid sort of sense.
Oh, yeah, completely. Right.
You have these clean lines of copper, these perfectly soldered pathways.
A signal goes from point A to point B, and it's just this closed unbroken loop.
It's binary, it's engineered, and you can visibly trace it.
Yeah, it's incredibly orderly.
I mean, you trace the wire, you find the exact destination.
There's no ambiguity at all.
But then as a student stepping into neurophysiology for the first time,
you look at the human brain and that entire engineering paradigm
just completely shatters.
So it falls apart immediately.
It really does.
Suddenly you're looking at this wet, messy chemical soup where the wires
and we're talking billions of them, they don't even actually touch each other.
Right. It is the ultimate biological paradox, honestly.
The most sophisticated, high speed communication network in the known universe
relies on physical gaps and floating chemicals to get its message across.
Which is just wild to wrap your head around.
And our mission today for this deep dive is to decode that exact paradox.
Exactly.
We're going to take some incredibly complex neuroscience from your lecture
slides and turn it into a clear, functioning mental map for you.
Yeah, we're going to bypass the dense jargon today.
Right. And figure out how a thought or a memory or an action
travels from a tiny spark in a single cell to a full blown physical behavior.
Because understanding how those disconnected wires actually bridge that gap,
how they truly communicate is the master key to everything.
It really is.
It unlocks the mechanics of learning, the physical nature of memory
and even the fundamental reasons why the medications we take actually work.
So let's start big and then kind of shrink down.
Picture a journey inward, starting from a satellite view and zooming
all the way down to like a single person on the street.
Gifts showing the brain from the outer gray matter, then white matter,
littered with synaptic dendritic buds.
So what you're seeing in that animation on slide two
is this beautiful descent from the gross anatomy.
It's a great visual.
It really is.
We start at the outer folds of the gray matter,
pushing down through the white matter past the ventricles down into the brainstem
and sweeping past structures like the amygdala, amygdala.
And we just keep zooming in deeper and deeper until we hit the microscopic level,
finally resting on a single individual neuron
that is absolutely covered in tiny little dendritic buds.
And when you look at those neural populations, the numbers are just staggering.
Yeah. We always hear about the 86 billion neurons in the brain, right?
They're usually treated as the undisputed rock stars of the nervous system.
The main characters. Yeah, exactly.
But research from Susana Herculon or Huzal and the Allen Brain Institute
on slide three reveals there are also
85 billion non neural cells hanging around, which is I mean,
that is almost a one to one ratio of neurons to non neurons. Right.
But I have to push back on the biology here a little bit.
If nearly half of the brain's cellular population isn't even made up of neurons,
what are all those other cells actually doing?
That's a great question.
Because nature usually doesn't waste that much energy just, you know, taking up space.
Oh, they definitely aren't just taking up space.
Those 85 billion non neural cells are the unsung heroes of the entire system.
OK, how so?
Well, we're talking about glial cells, epinidymal cells, epithelial cells,
parasites, they do the absolutely crucial background work.
Like what? For example,
epithelial cells physically form the blood,
cerebrospinal fluid barrier, which is the ultimate defense system for the brain.
And parasites regulate blood flow in the capillaries so the brain gets oxygen.
Epinidymal cells line the ventricles.
I mean, they provide the structure, the defense and the nourishment
so that the neurons can actually do their job of communicating.
So they're like the roadies, the security and the catering for the rock band.
Yes. Without them, the stadium falls apart.
And the show simply doesn't happen.
That is a perfect way to look at it.
They completely set the stage for the true stars of communication.
And when those stars communicate, it is just a spectacular light show,
Yeah, visually, those flashing fluorescent lights pulsing like fireflies
on a dark summer night, those represent real live electrical activity
firing across a living neural network. It's beautiful.
It is every single flash is a piece of data moving.
As we make our way through this presentation,
make sure to utilize the simulation on the right.
Start with the neuron view and check the guided tutorial box
located in the top menu by clicking the dropdown arrow
in the top right where it says show.
As you learn about the synaptic signaling, use the guided tutorial
So we've seen the fireflies.
We know there's a massive amount of electrical activity happening.
But let's look at the actual wiring on slide five.
Let's do it.
The fundamental structure of a neuron is fairly distinct.
You have the dendrites, which look like the sprawling branches of a tree
reaching out to receive incoming signals.
Right. Then you have the soma,
which is the main cell body holding the nucleus.
And then you have this long single tail like structure called the axon,
which acts as the wire carrying the signal away to the next destination.
Crucially, though, wrapped around that axon,
you have the myelin and myelin sheath.
And that myelin and myelin is where the magic of biological speed actually happens.
It kind of reminds me of wrapping electrical tape around a frayed wire in your house.
Oh, totally.
It just acts as an insulator so the current doesn't leak out.
It acts as an insulator.
Yeah. But if you look at the diagram on slide six,
it also provides a massive speed upgrade.
Wait, really? How?
Well, myelination wraps around the axon in distinct segments,
trapping and insulating positively charged ions,
ensuring they're concentrated and readily available right where they are needed.
OK, I see.
Because of that myelin and myelin insulation,
the neural signal doesn't have to slowly like inch its way down
the entire length of the biological wire.
So it skips. Exactly.
It literally jumps from one uninsulated gap to the next. Wow.
This sultatory conduction allows neural signals
to travel significantly faster than they ever could in a bare,
unmyelinated axon.
So the wave has traveled down the axon.
It's moving incredibly fast, jumping along that myelin and while insulation.
But here's where we hit the major plot twist of neurophysiology on slide seven.
The electrical signal reaches the very end of the axon terminal
and the road just ends.
The wires do not touch.
They don't touch.
There is a microscopic gap.
The synapse, SINapse.
The famous gap.
And as someone trying to understand the engineering of the body,
this feels profoundly counterintuitive.
It really does.
If the electrical wave we just talked about is so fast, so efficient
and so brilliantly insulated, why on earth does the brain
purposefully break the circuit?
It seems like a flaw.
Yeah. Why rely on floating chemicals to drift across a physical gap?
Isn't that slower and like significantly more risky?
It is slightly slower.
Yeah. But the tradeoff is what makes you human.
Wow. OK.
If everything were just hardwired electrically,
the brain would be nothing more than a simple calculator.
You'd only have binary responses.
Yeah. On or off.
Like a light switch.
Exactly. By breaking the circuit and introducing the synapse,
SINapse, the brain creates an opportunity for complex variable processing.
It's what I like to call the brain's handshake.
The brain's handshake.
Because it's an agreement, not just a command.
That's it.
It's the moment where a rigid binary electrical signal
is converted into a highly nuanced chemical signal.
OK, I see.
Right, because a single neuron is covered in
thousands of those little synaptic buds we saw earlier.
So it is receiving chemical keys from thousands of different cells at once.
Constantly.
How does it mathematically decide whether or not to actually trigger its own action potential?
You're touching on a really cool concept called summation.
And if we look at the post-synaptic potentials chart on the slide,
you'll see this is essentially a very complex biological voting system.
A voting system.
Yeah, imagine the receiving neuron as a politician,
try and make a decision, taking input from thousands of different advisors.
Some of the neurotransmitters it receives are excitatory, meaning they cast a yes vote to fire.
Others are inhibitory.
They cast a no vote, basically telling the neuron to stay quiet.
So it's essentially a microscopic tug of war.
Excitatory is pulling forward toward a spike.
Inhibitory is pulling backward.
Yes.
In neurophysiology, we call these EPSPs and IPSPs.
That stands for Excitatory and Inhibitory Post-synaptic Potentials.
Got it.
The chart illustrates EPSP-IPSP cancellation beautifully.
If an excitatory yes signal and an inhibitory no signal arrive at the exact same millisecond,
they literally cancel each other out.
Oh, wow.
So the internal voltage just stays completely flat.
Completely flat.
So how does a yes vote ever actually win the tug of war?
By summing the signals together, the process of summation happens in two ways.
Okay, what's the first way?
Spatial summation.
That's when multiple different synapses on the neuron receive yes signals at the exact same moment.
It's like 10 different friends shouting go from different sides of the room all at once.
That makes sense.
And the second way, temporal summation.
That is when a single synapse is hit repeatedly and rapidly with a yes signal.
Like one friend rapidly poking you on the shoulder saying go, go, go, go.
Ah, I see.
Right.
And if these summations build up enough positive charge to hit the threshold,
Well, it relies on an electrical process called the action potential.
Basically, specialized channels open and close along the length of the neuron's outer layer,
which is called the axon.
And this opening and closing allows a signal to travel down the line.
Visually, if you look at the diagram charting membrane potential over time,
you see this very specific, beautiful sequence of events.
Oh, I see it.
I'm picturing that classic graph with the massive, sharp spike right in the middle.
Walk us through how that spike actually happens.
So it starts at what we call the resting state.
The inside of the cell sits at roughly negative 70 millivolts.
Wait, why is it negative?
Because the cell actually spends a lot of energy
pumping positively charged molecules out just to keep the inside negative.
It's quiet, but it's highly primed.
Think of it like a stretched rubber band.
It holds tension just waiting for a trigger.
Okay, I like that visual.
Right.
So when a stimulus hits the neuron and is strong enough to cross a specific press hold,
it triggers a phase called depolarization.
So the rubber band snaps.
Exactly.
Suddenly, these specialized doorways open up along the membrane,
and positively charged sodium molecules come rushing back into the cell.
Oh, wow.
Yeah, this massive, sudden influx of positive charge shoots the internal voltage way up.
And that's the big spike on our graph, the literal spark of thought.
You got it.
But wait, if all this positive charge is just aggressively flooding into the cell,
wouldn't the cell just short circuit or overload?
How does it reset for the next signal?
That's a great question.
And it's exactly why the cell immediately enters a phase called repolarization.
Repolarization, okay.
Right.
As soon as the voltage spikes, the sodium door slams shut.
Then different channels open up, and positively charged potassium molecules rush out of the cell.
Oh, I see.
So it's carrying the positive charge away to bring the internal voltage back down.
Exactly.
It actually overshoots a bit, getting slightly too negative in a phase called hyperpolarization
before it eventually settles back down to that negative 70 millivolt resting state.
Stretched and ready to fire again.
That is an incredibly elegant mechanical loop.
It really is.
And this wave of rushing positive charge travels all the way down the long arm of the neuron,
the axon.
Let's actually watch this handshake happen in the animation on slide 12.
that happen in the synaptic terminal that lead to the release of neurotransmitters
that bind to postsynaptic receptors.
So visually, you can see the action potential reaching the end of the line.
Yeah. That electrical voltage forces calcium channels to open.
Right. Calcium rushes in.
And that acts as the biological signal for these tiny membrane bound bubbles
called vesicles, which are basically tiny cargo ships loaded with chemical messengers.
Precisely. The calcium tells those cargo ships
to move to the very edge of the cell membrane, fuse with it
and dump their chemical cargo into the synaptic left of the gap.
And then they float across.
Yep. Those chemicals then float across and bind to specific receptors
on the next neuron, passing that nuanced message along.
Zooming in on exactly how those cargo ships dock with the membrane
on slides 13 and 14 is just fascinating.
It's amazing.
To get that vesicle to fuse with the cell edge,
you have these highly specific proteins called snare proteins.
They act almost exactly like the teeth of a zipper.
That's a really good visual.
Yeah. They physically grab onto each other, twist
and pull the vesicle tight against the membrane
until the pressure just pox it open.
It's mechanical perfection at a molecular level.
And the real world application of this is slightly terrifying, honestly.
Oh, with Botox.
Yes. That exact zipping mechanism is what botulinum toxin targets.
Botox. It acts like a pair of molecular scissors
that sneaks in and snips those snare proteins in half.
If the zipper is broken, the vesicle can't dock.
The chemical signal can't cross the synapse, S-I-N-X,
and the muscle is completely paralyzed.
One microscopic cut to a protein zipper
and a human muscle just stops working.
It perfectly illustrates how vital that microscopic chemical handshake
is to our gross physical movements. Absolutely.
Right, back to the receiving end.
But looking at our next visual,
it seems not all of those receiving locks, the receptors, are created equal.
They absolutely are not.
The receptor dynamic illustration contrasts two entirely different systems.
Let's break them down.
Sure.
On the left, you have the ligand-gated ion channels we discussed earlier.
These are very straightforward.
The key?
Locks.
Right.
A neurotransmitter binds to the receptor,
the channel opens like a swinging door,
and positive molecules flow directly inside.
It is fast, direct, and immediate.
But on the right side of the illustration,
there's something much more convoluted happening.
Right.
Those are G-protein-coupled receptors, or GPCRs.
The neurotransmitter binds to the outside of the receptor,
but no door opens.
Then what happens?
Instead, the binding activates a G-protein that is attached to the inside of the receptor.
This G-protein breaks off and acts as an intracellular messenger.
So it travels deeper inside the cell?
Exactly.
It travels inside the cell to set off a complex cascade of signals,
which eventually go and modulate other ion channels elsewhere on the membrane.
We mentioned ion channels earlier.
Just to give you a sense of scale,
there are over 300 different types of ion channels in the human body.
Wow, 300.
Yeah.
And a single neuron terminal might contain 10 or more different kinds,
all tightly packed alongside complex structural proteins
Now, when you look at classic textbook diagrams,
the end of a neuron, the synaptic bouton,
usually looks like an empty balloon holding a few neat little vesicle
bubbles floating in empty space.
The empty sack myth. Right.
Which, if you look at the 3D illustration on slide 17,
couldn't be further from the truth. It's so crowded.
It is. A synapse, S-I-N-X, is incredibly dense.
It's a packed molecular city completely full of thousands of complex proteins,
mitochondria, structural scaffolding and molecules that are just constantly at work.
Let's look at the proof of just how busy this microscopic city is on slide 18.
In that visualization, you can actually see microtubules acting like superhighways.
Yeah, they're moving so fast.
They're constantly transporting neurotransmitters,
proteins and cellular parts back and forth.
The key takeaway here is that neurons
are fiercely biologically active all the time.
Even at rest.
Even when they're resting.
Yeah, even when they aren't actively firing an action potential,
they're constantly maintaining their readiness and rebuilding their infrastructure.
Right. But the most incredible feature of the brain on slide 19
is that it is not static.
It changes its own hardware based on what you do.
Neuroplasticity.
It is the nervous system's ability to fundamentally reorganize its physical
structure, build new pathways and strengthen connections in response
to practice, experience or even an injury.
Think about the illustration showing a person practicing guitar.
The very first time you try to play a chord, your fingers feel clumsy.
The movement is slow.
And you have to think about every micro adjustment. Right.
Mechanically, that happens because the synaptic connection
for that specific movement is incredibly thin and weak.
It's underdeveloped.
Exactly.
But as you repeat the motion, the physical connection between the presynaptic
and postsynaptic terminals physically thickens.
It builds more receptors.
It stages more vesicles.
The hardware literally upgrades to accommodate the software of your new skill.
The more pathway fires, the stronger the chemical handshake becomes.
I always picture it like walking through a dense, overgrown grassy field.
Oh, I love this analogy.
The first time you push your way through, it is tough going, right?
The grass immediately springs back up behind you.
But if you walk that exact same path every single day,
eventually you break the grass, you compact the soil and it becomes a permanent,
easy to travel dirt road.
Your brain does the exact same thing with neural pathways.
And we can witness this structural growth happening in real time.
Yeah.
It's amazing to watch.
You can literally see the central nervous system reaching out,
reorganizing, branching and building entirely new physical structures
in response to stimuli.
The experiences of the fish physically shape its biology.
And that plasticity, that biological ability to change,
Wow. And to make it even more complex, for a long time,
neuroscience assumed one neuron made one type of neurotransmitter.
But looking at slide 21, we now know about dual neurotransmission.
This is fascinating.
A single neuron can actually co-release different neurotransmitters
at the exact same time from the same terminal.
A single cell can shout two different messages
simultaneously to fine tune the handshake.
On the other side of the seesaw, you have the brakes.
GABA is your primary calling signal telling the brain to quiet down.
Serotonin regulates your mood and overall well-being.
And in the metal acting as powerful modulators,
you have dopamine, which drives pleasure, reward and motivation.
The famous one.
The famous one, exactly.
You also have acetylcholine, crucial for learning and muscle action.
And endorphins, which provide pain, relief and euphoria.
The brain is entirely dependent on keeping the gas
pedals and the brakes in perfect harmony, like that seesaw diagram on slide 22.
Exactly. If you only had gas pedals,
the system would just overheat and crash.
And we know exactly what happens when that balance fails.
Imagine the seesaw tipping too far toward excitation.
OK. If GABA binding is poor, meaning the brakes aren't working,
glutamate takes over. Oh, yeah.
This runaway, uninhibited electrical activity across the neural network
is the exact mechanical underlying cause of disorders like epilepsy.
So let's talk about the cargo itself.
The chemical is floating across that gap.
The neurotransmitters stuff.
Yeah, these are the molecules of mood, movement and memory.
And rather than just reciting a textbook list from the infographic on slide 23,
it helps to understand them as opposing forces in the brain.
It's a constant balancing act.
Right. On one side, you have your excitatory signals, the gas pedals.
OK. Glutamate is the most common neurotransmitter in the brain,
essential for forming memories and just getting things moving.
Adrenaline drives your fight or flight response,
while noradrenaline zeros in your concentration.
Which frees up a great point about how we try to treat imbalances
in this system with medication.
The receptors for these neurotransmitters aren't just located in one neat little spot.
Right. If you look at the brain maps on slide 24,
they are distributed widely across different regions of the brain and the body.
And this wide spatial map explains a very frustrating reality
for anyone who has ever taken a prescription drug, right? Side effects.
If you take a medication meant to increase serotonin
to help balance your emotional state, that pill doesn't have a GPS system.
It really doesn't.
It doesn't know how to only target the emotional centers of your brain.
It travels everywhere.
So while the drug hits the targets you want,
it inevitably hits serotonin receptors in entirely different systems.
Like where?
Well, a massive amount of your body's serotonin receptors
are actually located in your gut.
Oh, wow.
So you take a pill to adjust the chemical handshake in your brain for mood
and you end up with nausea or digestive changes.
Because you are inadvertently shaking hands
with the receptors in your stomach.
If we look at the final abstract illustration of regional connections,
it shows massive, sweeping, colorful arcs connecting entirely different brain regions.
It reminds us that while the fundamental language of the brain is that microscopic
electrochemical handshake we've been analyzing.
Right, the synapses.
Yeah, but the entire brain is intertwined in these massive, global neural networks.
It takes billions of cells, communicating perfectly across those gaps,
to produce complex thoughts, to feel empathy, or to learn something new.
That's a symphony.
actually work on slides 26 through 30.
Exactly.
Because the brain relies on these chemical handshakes and can rewire itself,
we have multiple ways to intervene when the system breaks down.
Take psychotherapy, for example.
Cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT.
A lot of people dismiss it as just talking.
Right. But fundamentally, CBT is a highly structured process
of unlearning and relearning.
How does that work mechanically?
By identifying a negative thought pattern and consciously forcing yourself
to adopt a different response,
CBT mechanically forces you to walk a new path in that grassy field you mentioned.
Oh, I see.
Over time, through repetition, you physically wear down a healthier dirt road
and the old negative pathway weakens from disuse.
You are literally using thought to drive physical plasticity.
That's incredible.
Then you have medications which operate right at the physical gap of the synapse,
SIN-apse.
Yes, they manipulate the chemical handshake directly.
Right.
A psychiatrist might prescribe a medication that blocks dopamine receptors
to calm the runaway signaling in psychosis,
or a medication that increases the amount of serotonin left in the gap
to help combat depression.
And then we have interventions that bypass the chemicals entirely
and go straight for the electrical wave.
Non-invasive brain stimulation or NIBS.
Things like RTMS, Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation.
Yes.
The brain is fundamentally an electrical organ,
which means it is susceptible to magnetic fields.
Right.
With RTMS, a patient sits with a large wire coil placed near their scalp.
That coil generates rapidly changing magnetic pulses.
Okay, so it's magnetic pulse.
Exactly.
Those magnetic fields safely penetrate the skull
and induce a localized, highly targeted electric field
in the brain tissue underneath.
We're using the laws of physics to directly tune and modulate
the cortical excitability of the brain, strengthening or weakening
specific circuits without ever introducing a single chemical.
Okay, let's step back and look at the big picture takeaway
from this deep dive into the brain's blueprint.
Think about the incredible microscopic journey
we just mapped out today.
It's a journey.
A thought, an impulse, or an action begins
as a tense electrical wave, snapping like a rubber band
and racing down an axon, insulated and accelerated
by a myelin, myelin sheath.
Then it hits the synapse, SINAPs, slamming the brakes
to convert that rapid electrical current
into a highly nuanced chemical messenger.
Those chemical cargo ships dock, unzip,
and flood across the void.
They bind like a key in a lock on the other side,
triggering a brand new electrical wave in the next cell.
And through the magic of neuroplasticity,
every single time you fire that sequence,
the physical structure of your brain becomes
a little bit stronger, a little bit more efficient.
Which leads us with a final, slightly provocative thought
to ponder as you review your notes.
Oh, lay it on us.
If every single thought you think,
every behavior you repeat, and every new skill you practice
physically alters the microscopic strength, structure,
and chemical balance of your synaptic connections.
Then from a purely neurobiological standpoint,
the brain you woke up with this morning
is physically, structurally different from the brain
you will go to sleep with tonight.
You are, quite literally, constantly rewiring
the physical nature of your own identity.
What a thought to end on.
Keep exploring those simulations.
Pay attention to the tension in the resting state.
Watch how the chemicals bridge the gap.
And thank you for joining us on this deep dive.